This is recording.
Excellent.
This is interview number four on the Cardiff Carnival 25th anniversary project.
Interviewer is Steve Fletcher.
Interviewee is Katherine McShane.
Could you just spell your name for us please Katherine?
Yes, it's Katherine, spelled C-A-T-H-R-Y-N.
McShane, which is M-C-S-H-A-N-E.
The interview is being recorded on the 7th of October 2014 and the venue is the Swicker office.
So Katherine, could you please tell us the history of your involvement in the Cardiff Carnival?
Okey doke. Well, I started being a participant in 1996, but I actually came across Carnival a couple of years before that.
When I first moved to Cardiff, I was out with my brother in town and the Carnival literally came across us and sort of started, well, trooping past us.
We must have been sort of in the Park Place area and I can just remember being completely wowed by it.
I recognised a couple of people in the parade, a friend Kimmy and Meg dancing past with a big, I think it was a big black umbrella she had.
So then we sort of got swept away by it and sort of went up to the museum steps where the finale part of the parade was happening.
I think Benjamin Zephaniah was involved that year and there was sort of a big anti-drugs type chant going on with, don't chase the dragon, chase the something.
Repeated over and over again, but it was really high energy.
It was sort of obviously, you know, the Carnival colours and dances and it was just really lively, really enjoyed sort of being, you know, watching it and being part of the crowd and was really wowed by it.
And didn't think anything of it really until a couple of years later when I met my then boyfriend Guy, who'd been a participant in the Carnival for a few years and he dragged me along to the mass camp to have a look, see what was going on and to get me involved.
So back then I was just 21 and my eldest son was three.
So we both got involved and I just really enjoyed it.
Back then it was in Cotets Community Centre and it was much more about the mass camp.
That's the part that I really enjoyed.
It was the kind of three weeks of going every day, socialising, making new friends, lots of quirky new friends, people like Keith and, you know, Marilyn Marion.
I'm trying to remember back those days, sort of those there was a big group of kids as well as parents, young people, also getting involved, sort of making things.
And back then it was, you couldn't do it now, but everyone was sort of sharing fags and having a drink, a lager, etc.
And in the community centre, obviously doesn't happen now in mass camp, but that was the sort of what it was like back then where it was sort of three weeks of almost sort of nonstop socialising and partying and making costumes at the same time.
And I also, that's the first time I ever got on stilts as well, a guy persuaded me to have a go and I never thought I would let go.
But he gave me to Kevin, who was then teaching people to do stilts and who automatically let go and made me go on my own.
And it was the scariest thing ever, but it was indoors as well.
So that was quite mad. So just tried lots and lots of different things.
And my son sort of tried lots of different things as well.
Back then, I didn't do a lot in the way of adventurous costume making.
I can remember Guy making a big Egyptian sort of dog mask thing.
Whereas Tathan, my son, was a monkey, so just needed minimal tail making, etc.
And I was a desert nomad. So again, didn't, didn't, you know, turban, smock, didn't need a lot of work.
So it was more about the socialising, having a go at different things.
And that year we were doing singing because the sections that year were sort of split into desert, sea.
I can't remember the other ones, but we were in the desert section where there were some people with kind of incredible Egyptian themed costumes
and then others with sort of simple sort of desert type things or post apocalyptic kind of Mad Max looking kind of costumes as well.
But each section had a song that Mohammed had sort of given each section a song.
And there was me, Guy, Sally McLennan, who I'd first met there, didn't see for years again until years later.
And we've become good friends now. But and I think there might have been one other person, but it was a small group of us who were doing the singing.
But Guy neglected to tell Mohammed, who's the artistic director, that he was actually going to be on stilts.
And obviously myself and Sally were not on stilts.
So it became this big logistical problem with regard to the microphone and where we were going to be positioned.
So in the end, he managed to work something around on the museum steps where by Guy could be right at the side, a few steps below us.
And then we were we were above so we could still share one microphone.
And that year was the year of the car where Ben and his group had this sort of
kind of rust bucket that they were trying to turn into a mobile sound system.
And it's been weeks and weeks turning into this mobile sound system.
And our cue for the singing at the end of the parade, when our section lined up on the museum steps, was the car coming across the bottom.
And once we saw the car move into place, then we would start singing.
And it was this chant that was when I started with in the shadow of the dunes.
So they were waiting and waiting and waiting for a car which never ended up appearing.
And someone in the end, I think, ran up to us and said, just sing, just sing.
You can't get through. You can't get through because it was stuck.
I think there were some bollards or something in the way, which meant this car was never going to come through and be our cue.
But at the end of the night, it did end up being a party, a central feature in town where we all danced around it at the end in the nighttime after the parade was finished.
But I really enjoyed that year and it got me hooked.
And I wanted to participate thereon, really.
The following year was still Cotet's Community Centre.
And it's still, you know, I still see Cotet's Community Centre as being where kind of Carnival is or was, or, you know, it's still sort of the place.
If I think Carnival, I think Cotet's Community Centre.
And that was the five senses year where there was lots of the sixth sense was added and that included lots of aliens.
All the little boys wanted to be sort of alien things.
And I can remember David, one of the boys crossing the food in the food section, they had cupcakes and big cupcake skirts.
And David decided he wanted to be an alien jumping out of a cupcake.
So he had made this elaborate costume.
So that was the first year I started actually sort of making sort of any serious costumes.
And I was doing an alien for my little boy.
And I was with a dance group and we were red hot chilli peppers.
So I made these kind of tapered red dresses with kind of and we were printing them ourselves with kind of pepper designs.
And I was in a group with June then, June Campbell Davis and we for that year.
And I had a couple of years off then because of having babies and came back into it in 2000.
And we'd moved then. Cotet's Community Centre was no more.
So that was a bit sad. But we were at chapter here.
And that was the first year that Fred was in it.
So Fred was he's my second son and Fred was two, I think. Yeah, must have been two.
And that's sort of those the years following, I was always kind of in sections with the children rather than in a dance section,
but always trying to sort of do something a little bit different and do my own thing as well as herding children or herding cats.
And so that was the first year was the shaman section.
And so we did a big elaborate dressing up of a push chair for Fred.
And we sort of were all purple and white with feathers and and things.
And that year started down the bay as well, if I remember rightly, instead, because we started in Mount Stewart Primary School.
So it was a different route as well.
Again, year after we were back here in chapter and it was a low budget year, I'd say,
where everything was made out of with these and sticky back plastic that must have got a job lot from somewhere.
And it was Ben and Jude then who were kind of helping helping the kids sort of create their own creations.
And we were in the rights of spring section and a little bit rather tough and wanted to be a dragon.
And Fred wanted to be sheep.
So I was then tasked with helping them create these these animals, which were then paraded.
And I decided I'd be a massive daisy.
I don't know why, but I made a kind of a winged jobby from day based on daisy flower.
And again, the following year, there was the rat racers.
They had they they were making cars again out of sticky back plastic and each sort of individualizing their own cars to race each other.
I made this dress out of car parts, so I had sort of headlights, bra, that kind of thing and steering wheel type headpiece and various things.
I had these big flags and was trying to control lots of little boys in cars who had been told they were rat racers and wanted to race.
So but in a parade, then trying to hold them back and without them running away, it was sort of like a lot a lot of juggling, juggling with kids and sort of that.
Always good friend. And I had a similar similar problem the following year, because they were they were I was with a group of kids being airplanes.
Who again, wanted to fly all over the place, so needing to be controlled.
But I was I'd I'd I'd done a dress that was sort of on the theme of a runway with a headpiece that was like an airplane.
So I was again trying to control lots of children, one of which was Caroline's daughter, who in the lineup informed me, I think I might be allergic to face paint scratching.
Quickly having to sort of rush to the bathroom and kind of wash everything off.
So we had a bit of a panic attack.
So I think that that was for a sort of few years I was sort of in children's sections.
Until 2005, when it was the Blue Devils year when Spooky and Catcher came over from Trinidad and myself and Fred.
Fred was seven years old.
We just loved it.
We went to every single workshop because we loved it.
We just thought it was fantastic.
The whole sort of well, spooky and his kind of menacing presence and the whole dance.
We just loved it.
We went to every single one because we thought we would, you know, we were really taken by the kind of Blue Devils concept.
And I think that was probably one of my favourite parades despite pouring rain because obviously the costume involves very little clothing,
but being head to toe in blue body paint.
And I think that was one of my favourite parades despite pouring rain because obviously the costume involves very little clothing,
but being head to toe in blue body paint with some horns, a tail, maybe a pitchfork.
Did we have wings? We must have had wings. We must have had some blue wings as well.
But mostly it was being painted head to foot in blue.
That's the costume.
And of course, that year it poured with rain.
It was chucking it down.
And I can remember going through the bay because the parade went through the bay that year and it pouring with rain that with the body paint running off us
because we were going from blue to green and then swicker volunteers kind of running up with big buckets of body paint.
So we could splash it over us again and sort of keep touching up and keep touching up.
But it was like running off us and the street was running with like blue water.
But it was really good fun. It was really good fun kind of because it was the first year really of trying to...
Previously, I think in the parades we'd been sort of entertaining people,
but with the Blue Devils you're actually trying to scare people and sort of shock and surprise.
And so it was a really different way to play carnival.
So it was kind of jumping at people, kind of being menacing, kind of making babies cry.
It was there was a really different sort of style of carnival from what we'd been sort of doing in the years leading up to that.
So it was really good fun.
And plus, I think that year was the first year I met Kath Leggett and we were Blue Devils together and we were being very naughty.
And we did have a little bit of a drink to keep out the cold before we started, which helped in keeping us going.
And we just had such a ball that year kind of running around and yes, causing trouble.
And Fred Levim, he really enjoyed it that year as well because, you know, how can you go wrong?
Kind of little boys with pitchforks, you know, they had a great time.
The following year, I made a bit of a mistake costume wise.
I'd been asked whether myself and the boys wanted to be in a big Chinese dragon costume, which was in separate sections, but joined together.
And I found that one really restricting because I've always liked sort of playing, dancing with the crowd and sort of, yeah, just doing my own thing.
Whereas that year just felt a bit tied in and a bit, yeah, very restricted in my movement.
So I kind of decided at that point that I'd never do a massive costume again.
My eldest son Tathland started doing steel pans that year as well.
And he kind of he sort of carried on doing that for a few years with with them Rocco until he kind of got to the sort of teenage age where he didn't you know, he didn't want to dress up anymore.
He was sort of sort of I think the last parade he did was part of it.
Let me have a look. I think it was in 2007.
And as soon as the parade finished, he whipped off his costume, threw it at me and sort of like ran off to join the big weekend with his friends.
You know, so I thought, yeah, I don't think he's going to be doing it again until he's kind of grown out of that and comes back as a sort of as a grown up.
But the following year after that was the first year that Aylir, my youngest son, was involved because Aylir was born in 2005.
So he was a spectator in the crowd 2005, 2006 and then 2007.
He joined for the first time and he and myself were dancing diseases.
And it was the theme. The theme was linked to the anniversary of the abolition of slavery so that we represented the disease that sort of had wiped out so many people.
Fred was in a different section as a bloodhound with Bud.
They joined up together and they were bloodhounds again being menacing and naughty in the crowd.
So, you know, suits suits both both both them.
But Aylir did love him. He did the whole thing on foot.
No push chair this time. It was just him on foot and apart from a little bit of carrying now and again.
But he was hooked from from from the off and he's never missed the carnival since.
So from that year, he's been in it every year.
The year after that was the first dragon section within the carnival, which became a recurring theme.
And myself and Aylir were dragons.
And I can remember making so many dragon masks.
So it was a bit of a production line that year because it was quite a big section.
But there were quite a few first time participants who didn't really know what they were doing.
So I ended up sort of well with Caroline making sort of 10 head pieces in a row for various people.
So I made a lot of dragon head pieces that year.
And and then the following year was the year that everyone was a dragon.
It was the Here Be Dragons Carnival.
But that year we were I was in what was the sort of start of what's now Carnival Crew.
So we had our own dragon section.
But Aylir wasn't part of that group.
So it meant that I had to ask my husband, Rickson, to be part of the carnival and to be with Aylir
because Aylir really, really wanted to join in and be involved, but couldn't do it on his own.
And so by default, Rickson had to be in it.
And he wasn't interested in making costumes or anything like that.
So I had to make all the costumes and he just turned up on the day.
But really, really enjoyed himself once he did it.
And he's done it every year since.
But on the basic stipulation that I make him a costume and the costume has to make him anonymous.
So either some sort of mask or headpiece that sort of hides his identity.
And once he's hidden, he's quite happy to kind of play a role and be a full part of the carnival.
So all dragons.
But from my participation then in that initial dragon carnival group,
I got asked and invited to join Samba Galez's dance group.
So from that year onwards, I've always been part of the Samba Galez dance group, which is great.
But it's sort of more choreographed compared to what I was doing before.
I always danced in the carnival, but not in a choreographed way.
Whereas now I'm in a group where it's structured and choreographed.
Quite high energy.
We've done lots of parades in the rain since then, which sometimes is welcome to us
because we've got really hot and bothered dancing and then we can cool off in the rain.
I've also started making since then, making bigger and bigger costumes every year
because as Ayler has grown up, he's become more and more demanding and more creative in his thinking
with regards to what he'd like to be.
For years, he talks about being a turtle.
So the first year that there was an Anything Goes theme,
I said, all right, then you can be a turtle.
But I hadn't a clue where to start with making a turtle.
But luckily, again, I'd met people at carnival camp.
There was Jude, who does a lot of basket weaving, who helped me with the shell for the turtle.
And also Ray, who helped me with the
actually sort of making a frame and a backpack for Ayler.
So that was the first massive costume that I made.
And then every year since then, Ayler has got bigger and better ideas of what he wants to be.
So the following year was a rain cloud.
And then last year was a massive, this year rather, was a massive rain cloud.
He wanted sort of almost like a totem pole of African masks, as you do.
So he'd researched it, found the types of masks he'd wanted on the Internet.
So again, it was this big challenge to try and sort of match Ayler's vision
and what I could make in the three weeks available with the results.
And then he was able to do that.
And so that was the first big challenge.
And then last year was a massive,
I think, big challenge to try and match Ayler's vision
and what I could make in the three weeks available with the results available.
And I think we did a pretty good job.
But I'm dreading what he comes up with next year.
Because it's just going to be, oh no, what next?
I think it's in terms of emphasis, I suppose.
I think I started off, it was more of a go along for a social.
And I had no experience of making anything at all, really.
And in the first years I didn't really make much.
Or I followed other people's instructions.
If someone told me to print this there, then I did that.
Or stick this there.
I just followed orders, as it were.
Whereas now I do a lot more of my own design and making work
with a bit of support from those who know what will fall over
and what won't fall over, or what materials I should be using
and what I shouldn't.
But otherwise, a lot of the making I do myself,
and the bigger and better.
Also, obviously I started off with singing.
Did a little bit of dance.
Then was mostly in kid sections.
Whereas now I'm back to what I wanted to do originally,
which was dance.
But then the making for the rest of the family,
so that they can participate as well.
So yeah, it's changed over the years.
But I'd thoroughly recommend it.
It's the high point of the summer every year.
Kath McShane with an impressive 17 Cardiff Carnivals under your belt.
I wish to formally declare for posterity,
you are indeed a Cardiff Carnival hero.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.